---
title: Anarchy Library Documentation
author: Peter Mawhorter (pmawhorter@gmail.com)
...
# Anarchy Library Documentation

`anarchy` is a library for generating random numbers in an incremental and
reversible fashion. It also has routines for incremental shuffling and
distribution of items. The goal is to give a high level of control to designers
of PCG systems while maintaining incremental operation as is necessary in
incrementally-generated open-world situations.

However, it can also be used in simpler situations as it provides a variety of
built-in convenience functions like pseudo-gaussian and
exponentially-distributed random numbers (these are not reversible).

## Replacing `random()`

The incremental shuffling algorithm can be used as a replacement for a standard
random number generator in cases where you want to guarantee a global
distribution of items and are currently using independent random number checks
to control item distribution. For example, if you have code that looks like
this:

```python
def roll_item():
  r = random.random()
  if r < 0.01: # 1% chance for Rare item
    return "Rare"
  elif r < 0.06: # 5% chance for Uncommon item
    return "Uncommon"
  else:
    return "Common"
```

You have no guarantees about exactly how often rare/uncommon items will be, and
some players will get lucky or unlucky. Instead, even if you don't know the
number of roll_item calls, with `anarchy` you can do this:

```python
N = 0
seed = 472389223

def roll_item():
  global N, seed
  r = anarchy.cohort_shuffle(N, 100, seed + N//100)
  if r < 1:
    return "Rare"
  elif r < 6:
    return "Uncommon"
  else:
    return "Common"
```

In this code there are two extra variables that have to be managed in some way,
but the benefit is that for every 100 calls to the function, "Rare" will be
returned exactly once, and "Uncommon" will be returned exactly 5 times. Each
group of 100 calls will still have a different ordering of the items, because
it uses a different seed.

There are many other potential applications of reversible/incremental
shuffling; this is one of the most direct.

## Core Functions

(Note: these are the most useful functions available but there are others, like
the individual reversible operations used for shuffling or random number
generation. Those functions are documented in the source code.)

### Single Number Functions

Deal with individual random numbers.

- [`prng`](#prng)
- [`rev_prng`](#rev_prng)
- [`udist`](#udist)
- [`pgdist`](#pgdist)
- [`flip`](#flip)
- [`idist`](#idist)
- [`expdist`](#expdist)

### `prng` {#prng}

Parameters:
  - `x` (int): The current random number (the next one is returned).
  - `seed` (int): The seed; each seed will produce a distinct sequence of
      numbers.
Returns (int): The next random number in the sequence for the given seed.
A reversible pseudo-random number generator. Uses low-level reversible
functions to scramble a number and produce an hard-to-predict result. The
`rev_prng` function is the inverse of this function.



### `rev_prng` {#rev_prng}

Parameters:
  - `x` (int): the current random number (the previous one is returned).
  - `seed` (int): The seed; each seed will produce a distinct sequence of
      numbers.
Returns (int): The previous random number in the sequence for the given seed.
The inverse of `prng` (see above). Returns the previous number in a
pseudo-random sequence, so that:
  
```py
prng(rev_prng(n, seed), seed) == n
rev_prng(prng(n, seed), seed) == n
```



### `udist` {#udist}

Parameter (int): `seed`--The seed that determines the result (could be a
result from `prng` or `lfsr`)
Returns (float): A pseudo-random number between 0 (inclusive) and 1
(exclusive).



### `pgdist` {#pgdist}

Parameter (int): `seed`--The seed that determines the result.
Returns (float): A pseudo-random number between 0 (inclusive) and 1
(exclusive).
The result is created by averaging three results from `udist`, and its
distribution has a Gaussian-like shape centered at 0.5.



### `flip` {#flip}

Parameters:
  - `p` (float): The probability of returning True.
  - `seed` (int): The seed value that determines the result.
Returns (True or False): a decision value.
Flips a biased coin with probability `p` of being true. Using the same seed
always gives the same result, but over many seeds the given probability is
adhered to.



### `idist` {#idist}

Parameters:
  - `seed` (int): The seed value that determines the result.
  - `start` (int): The minimum possible output value.
  - `end` (int): One more than the maximum possible output value.
Returns (int): a pseudo-random integer between the start (inclusive) and the
end (exclusive).
Returns a number drawn evenly from the given integer range, including the
lower end but excluding the higher end (even if the lower end is given
second).
Distribution bias is about one part in (range/2^63).



### `expdist` {#expdist}

Parameter (int): `seed`--The seed that determines the result.
Returns (float): A number with an exponential distribution.
Generates a number from an exponential distribution with mean 0.5 given
a seed.
See: [StackExchange answer on exponential distribution](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/28004/random-exponential-like-distribution)


### Cohort Functions

Deal similarly with numbers from a range.

- [`cohort`](#cohort)
- [`cohort_inner`](#cohort_inner)
- [`cohort_outer`](#cohort_outer)
- [`cohort_shuffle`](#cohort_shuffle)
- [`rev_cohort_shuffle`](#rev_cohort_shuffle)
- [`distribution_portion`](#distribution_portion)
- [`distribution_prior_sum`](#distribution_prior_sum)
- [`distribution_segment`](#distribution_segment)

### `cohort` {#cohort}

Parameters:
  - `outer` (int): An integer to be assigned to a cohort.
  - `cohort_size` (int): The size of each cohort.
Returns (int): Which cohort the given outer item is assigned to.
Simply returns the outer index divided by the cohort size, rounded down. Note
that for extremely large integers, they will be truncated to fit within 64
bits.



### `cohort_inner` {#cohort_inner}

Parameters:
  - `outer` (int): An integer to be assigned to a cohort.
  - `cohort_size` (int): The size of each cohort.
Returns (int): Where within its cohort the given integer ends up.
Computes within-cohort index for the given outer index and cohorts of
the given size, which is just the index modulus the cohort size. Like
`cohort`, truncates to 64 bits.



### `cohort_outer` {#cohort_outer}

Parameters:
  - `cohort` (int): Which cohort the item is in.
  - `inner` (int): The index of the item in that cohort.
  - `cohort_size` (int): The size of each cohort.
Returns (int): The outer index that would be mapped to this within-cohort
index.
This is the Inverse of `cohort_and_inner`: it computes the outer index from a
cohort number and inner index.



### `cohort_shuffle` {#cohort_shuffle}

Parameters:
  - `inner` (int): The index of an item in a cohort.
  - `cohort_size` (int): The size of each cohort.
  - `seed` (int): The seed that determines the shuffle order.
Returns (int): A new within-cohort index for the given item.
Implements an incremental shuffle, such that if you were to call
`cohort_shuffle` on each index in a cohort of a given size, each of the
items would end up in a different new spot within that cohort. The
shuffle is reversible using the `rev_cohort_shuffle` function.
It works by composing several of the simpler reversible/indexable
functions to produce a sufficiently complex operation that humans
generally won't be able to see the pattern it uses.

Note that this should *not* be used for cryptography or statistics:
when the cohort size is even moderately large (say 100), the number of
possible shuffles (constrained by the seed, which is 64 bits, so 2^64)
will be much smaller than the number of possible orderings of the
items, so not all possible orderings will be able to be produced.
Both the seed and the cohort size are used to determine the particular
ordering of items, so the same seed with a different cohort size won't
necessarily produce a similar ordering to another run.



### `rev_cohort_shuffle` {#rev_cohort_shuffle}

Parameters:
  - `inner` (int): The index of an item in a cohort.
  - `cohort_size` (int): The size of each cohort.
  - `seed` (int): The seed that determines the shuffle order.
Returns (int): A new within-cohort index for the given item.
Works just like `cohort_shuffle`, but applies the same operations in
the opposite order, so that:
```py
seed = 478273827
y = cohort_shuffle(x, 100, seed)
x == rev_cohort_shuffle(y, 100, seed)
```



### `distribution_portion` {#distribution_portion}

Parameters:
  - `segment` (int): Which segment of a distribution we are interested
  in.
  - `total` (int): The total number of items being distributed.
  - `n_segments` (int): The number of segments to distribute items
      among.
  - `segment_capacity` (int): The capacity of each segment.
  - `roughness` (float in [0,1]): How rough the distribution should be.
  - `seed` (int): The seed that determines a specific distribution.
Returns (int): the number of items from a distribution that end up in
the given segment.
Given that `total` items are to be distributed evenly among `n_segment`
segments each with at most `segment_capacity` items and we're in
segment `segment` of those, computes how many items are in this
segment. The `roughness` argument must be a number between 0 and 1
indicating how even the distribution is: 0 indicates a perfectly even
distribution, while 1 indicates a perfectly random distribution. Does
work proportional to the log of the number of segments.

Note that segment_capacity * n_segments should be > total.



### `distribution_prior_sum` {#distribution_prior_sum}

Parameters:
  - `segment` (int): Which segment of a distribution we are interested
  in.
  - `total` (int): The total number of items being distributed.
  - `n_segments` (int): The number of segments to distribute items
      among.
  - `segment_capacity` (int): The capacity of each segment.
  - `roughness` (float in [0,1]): How rough the distribution should be.
  - `seed` (int): The seed that determines a specific distribution.
Returns (int): the cumulative number of items from a distribution that
are distributed before the given segment.
Does similar math to the `distribution_portion` function above, but
instead of returning the number of items in the given segment, it
returns the number of items in all segments before the given segment.
Only does work proportional to the log of the number of segments.



### `distribution_segment` {#distribution_segment}

Parameters:
  - `index` (int): Which item are we asking about.
  - `total` (int): The total number of items being distributed.
  - `n_segments` (int): The number of segments to distribute items
      among.
  - `segment_capacity` (int): The capacity of each segment.
  - `roughness` (float in [0,1]): How rough the distribution should be.
  - `seed` (int): The seed that determines a specific distribution.
Returns (int): the index of the segment that the item of interest is
distributed into.
Computes the segment number in which a certain item appears (one of the
`total` items distributed between segments; see `distribution_portion`
above). Requires work proportional to the log of the number of
segments.
Note that the index should be between 0 and `total - 1`.


